Radioactive decay MMS Verification Case (#16)
festim-dev/V-V-report: report/verification/mes_radioactive_decay.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.2
kernelspec:
  display_name: vv-festim-report-env
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Radioactive decay

> This example is a radioactive decay (`RadioactiveDecay`) problem on simple unit area meshes with a uniform mobile concentration and no boundary condition.
> 
> The formulation is:
> 
> $$\frac{\partial c_m}{\partial t} =  \nabla \cdot (D \nabla c_m)  - \lambda c_m - \sum \left( -k_i \ c_m \ (n_i - c_{t,i}) + p_i \ c_{t,i} \right)$$
> 
> 
> In this problem, for simplicity, we don't set any traps and we model an isolated domain (no flux boundary conditions) to mimick a simple 0D case. Diffusion can therefore be neglected and the problem is:
> $$
> \begin{align}
>     \nabla \cdot (D \ \nabla{c}) = 0 &  \quad \text{on }  \Omega  \\
>     \sum \left( -k_i \ c_m \ (n_i - c_{t,i}) + p_i \ c_{t,i} \right) = 0 & \quad \text{(no traps)}
> \end{align}
> $$(problem_decay)
> 
> The exact solution for mobile concentration is:
> 
> $$
> \begin{equation}
>     c_\mathrm{exact} = e^{-\lambda t}
> \end{equation}
> $$(c_exact_decay)
> 
> We can then run a FESTIM model with these conditions and compare the numerical solution with $c_\mathrm{exact}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example is a radioactive decay (`RadioactiveDecay`) problem on simple unit interval with a uniform mobile concentration and no boundary condition.

In this problem, for simplicity, we don't set any traps and we model an isolated domain (no flux boundary conditions) to mimick a simple 0D case. Diffusion can therefore be neglected and the problem is:

$$
\begin{align}
    \frac{\partial c}{\partial t} = - \lambda \ c &  \quad \text{on }  \Omega  \\
\end{align}
$$(problem_decay)

The exact solution for mobile concentration is:

$$
\begin{equation}
    c_\mathrm{exact} = c_0 e^{-\lambda t}
\end{equation}
$$(c_exact_decay)

Here, $c_0$ is the initial concentration and $\lambda$ is the decay constant (in $s^{-1}$). We can then run a FESTIM model with these conditions and compare the numerical solution with $c_\mathrm{exact}$.

We can then run a FESTIM model with these conditions and compare the numerical solution with $c_\mathrm{exact}$.
```

    my_model.T = F.Temperature(value=300)

    my_model.boundary_conditions = []  # no BCs to have 0D case

    my_model.mesh = F.MeshFromVertices(np.linspace(0, 1, 1001))

    my_model.sources = [
        F.RadioactiveDecay(decay_constant=np.log(2) / half_life, volume=1)
    ]

    derived_quantities = F.DerivedQuantities([F.TotalVolume("solute", volume=1)])
    my_model.exports = [derived_quantities]

    my_model.settings = F.Settings(
        absolute_tolerance=1e-10,
        relative_tolerance=1e-10,
        final_time=5 * half_life,  # s
    )

    my_model.initialise()
    my_model.run()

    time = derived_quantities.t
    concentration = derived_quantities[0].data
    return time, concentration
```

## Comparison with exact solution

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-cell]

tests = []
for half_life in np.linspace(1, 100, 5):
    tests.append(run_model(half_life))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [hide-input]

from matplotlib import cm
from matplotlib.colors import LogNorm

norm = LogNorm(vmin=1e-2, vmax=100)

for time, concentration in tests:
    plt.plot(
        time,
        concentration,
        label=f"half-life = {half_life:.2f} s",

>         color=cm.Blues(norm(half_life)),

Reviewer: I think this causes all the lines to have the same colour (dark blue because it is the last value of `half_life`).

Author: you're right, should've tested that change. just fixed it.
